
Are you a webmaster? Find out how to easily add Textise to your web site.

This page has been Textised!
The original page address was https://www.theguardian.com/world/2019/may/03/jair-bolsonaro-brazil-us-visit-cancelled-protest
For sharing use http://tinyurl.com/yy9bexoe

Here are some options:

- Back to original page (in this window | in a new window)
- Convert this page to a PDF
- Print this page
- Textise Home Page (full version | text only version)
- Textise Options Page (choose font size, font colour, etc.)

Are you a webmaster? Find out how to easily add Textise to your web site.

Skip to main content
The Guardian - Back to home
Support The Guardian
Available for everyone, funded by readers
Contribute   Subscribe   Support us
  Search jobs Dating
    Sign in   My account
Comments & replies
Public profile
Account details
Emails & marketing
Membership
Contributions
Subscriptions
  Sign out
  Search

switch to the   UK edition
switch to the   US edition
switch to the   Australia edition
switch to the   International edition
current edition:   UK edition
News
Opinion
Sport
Culture
Lifestyle
    Show  More
UK news
World news
Business
Football
UK politics
Environment
Education
Society
Science
Tech
Global development
Cities
Obituaries
The Guardian view
Columnists
Cartoons
Opinion videos
Letters
Football
Rugby union
Cricket
Tennis
Cycling
F1
Golf
Boxing
Rugby league
Racing
US sports
Film
Music
TV & radio
Books
Art & design
Stage
Games
Classical
Fashion
Food
Recipes
Travel
Health & fitness
Women
Men
Love & sex
Beauty
Home & garden
Money
Cars
  What term do you want to search?
Make a contribution
Subscribe
switch to the   US edition
switch to the   Australia edition
switch to the   International edition
Search jobs
Dating
Holidays
Masterclasses
Digital Archive
Guardian Print Shop
Patrons
Discount Codes
The Guardian app
Video
Podcasts
Pictures
Newsletters
Today's paper
Inside the Guardian
The Observer
Guardian Weekly
Professional networks
Crosswords
  Facebook
  Twitter
Search jobs
Dating
Holidays
Masterclasses
Digital Archive
Guardian Print Shop
Patrons
Discount Codes
World
Europe
US
Americas
Asia
Australia
Middle East
Africa
Inequality
Cities
Global development
Brazil
Brazil's Jair Bolsonaro abruptly cancels US visit after protests
Climbdown by far right leader, who was due to receive prestigious award, called ‘a very big embarrassment’

Dom Phillips   in Rio De Janeiro

Sat 4 May 2019 03.20 BST  Last modified on Sat 4 May 2019 21.54 BST

Share on Facebook
Share on Twitter
Share via Email
[Image: Jair Bolsonaro gestures during a ceremony at the Planalto Palace in Brasilia, Brazil.]

  Jair Bolsonaro gestures during a ceremony at the Planalto Palace in Brasilia, Brazil. Photograph: Adriano Machado/Reuters
Brazil’s far-right president, Jair Bolsonaro, has abruptly cancelled a US trip to receive a prestigious award following a storm of protest over his history of homophobic, racist and misogynist remarks and plans to erode environmental protections in the Amazon.

The cancellation, announced suddenly on Friday, came after the original venue ditched the event, the mayor of New York City attacked his presence and major corporate sponsors pulled out. Bolsonaro’s spokesman blamed ideological attacks from interest groups and Bill de Blasio, the mayor of New York.

Financial Times pulls out of gala honouring Brazil's Jair Bolsonaro

Read more
The cancellation is a humiliating climbdown for Bolsonaro, who idolises the US and was feted by Donald Trump during a March visit to Washington. Analysts said it is a sign of the international reprobation his extremist views and anti-environment positions are beginning to spark around the world.

“It is a very big embarrassment,” said Paulo Baía, a professor of political science at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro.

The annual person of the year award ceremony was due to be hosted on 14 May by the Brazilian-American Chamber of Commerce. Alongside the US secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, Bolsonaro was to be honoured for “fostering closer commercial and diplomatic ties between Brazil and the United States” and his “commitment to building a strong and durable partnership” between both countries, the chamber said.

The gala event was originally due to be hosted at the American Museum of Natural History – but the museum pulled the event after criticism from LGBT and environmental groups. Last month Bolsonaro said Brazil could not become a “gay tourism” paradise and his government has come under fire for plans to dismantle Amazon protections and develop protected indigenous reserves.

“Jair Bolsonaro is a dangerous man,” tweeted De Blasio as he thanked the museum for its decision.

The gala event was moved to the Marriott Marquis hotel but then Delta Airlines and Bain & Company, a management consulting company, pulled out, CNN reported. The Financial Times followed suit.

“Actually showing up could have been a complete disaster, with protesters filling Times Square, and the event becoming a symbol of civil society standing up to the far-right leader,” said Oliver Stuenkel, a professor of international relations at São Paulo’s Getulio Vargas Foundation.

In a statement on Friday, Bolsonaro’s spokesman, Gen Otávio do Rêgo Barros, blamed “resistance and deliberate attacks from the mayor of New York and pressure from groups of interest”. The general said these attacks had been “ideological”.

Maurício Santoro, a professor of international relations at the State University of Rio de Janeiro, said it was remarkable that Bolsonaro was facing such corporate protests just four months into his presidency.
