
[Image: Germany ends probe into doctor from Chile-based Nazi sect]
Archive photo from 1999 showing the former doctor Hartmut Hopp, part of the Colonia Dignidad sect. Photo: DPA
AFP
news@thelocal.de
@thelocalgermany
7 May 2019
15:10 CEST+02:00
German prosecutors said Tuesday they had dropped their probe against a former doctor in the "Colonia Dignidad" Nazi paedophile sect that was based in a remote compound in Chile.
Hartmut Hopp, 74, was a physician in the notorious group that abused members – adults and children – and was used to torture and "disappear" regime critics during the 1973-1990 dictatorship of Augusto Pinochet.

Prosecutors in the city of Krefeld said that "after exhausting all promising investigative leads, it was not possible to substantiate a sufficient suspicion under any legal aspect necessary for an indictment".

SEE ALSO: German court says it won't jail doctor from Nazi paedophile sect

Hopp was the right-hand man of the late convicted paedophile Paul Schäfer, a former Wehrmacht soldier and lay preacher who in 1961 founded the commune that indoctrinated residents and kept them as virtual slaves.

The scale of the atrocities committed at the fenced-in 13,000-hectare mountain commune some 350 kilometres south of Santiago came to light only after the end of Pinochet's regime.

Hopp was convicted in Chile of crimes including complicity in Schäfer's rape and sexual abuse of minors, but in 2011 he fled to Germany before the final court ruling against him could be imposed.

Evidence fell short

A German court initially upheld the Chilean court's jail term of five years and one day, in a 2017 ruling.

However, that was overturned in September 2018 by a higher court in Düsseldorf, which found that the evidence provided by the Chilean court fell short of that demanded by German justice.

It said it had found no concrete evidence that Hopp, who ran the compound's clinic, had actively aided and abetted the abuses committed by Schäfer, who ran its boarding school.

Now the German prosecutors have said they have ended their own investigation, launched in 2011, that also looked into the 1976 killings of three student activists.

Sect-founder Schäfer had in 1997 faced a series of lawsuits and fled Chile.

He was arrested in Argentina in 2005 and convicted in Chile the following year for sexual abuse of children, weapons possession and human rights violations.

He died in a Chilean jail in 2010 at the age of 88 while serving a 20-year sentence.


Get notified about breaking news on The Local
Share this article
Popular articles
Quiz: How well do you know your German false friends?
Update: 143 flights cancelled at Frankfurt Airport due to drone sighting
Berlin park's 'drug dealing zones' spark outrage
More than two thirds of readers reject German Autobahn speed limit proposal
How Berlin’s housing crisis leaves women vulnerable to sexual predators
Member comments
The Local is not responsible for content posted by users.
Become a Member or sign-in to leave a comment.
From our sponsors
Get a month's worth of your favourite newspapers and magazines - for free
Readly - the 'Spotify of magazines' - is offering readers of The Local a free month's worth of unlimited all-you-can-read magazines. All you need to do is answer one quick question.

‘If you have an accident, no-one is coming for you’
As easy as ABC - Tips for a child-friendly move abroad
More news
Merkel successor 'will not not seek leadership before 2021 poll'
Germany mulls 'mosque tax' to cut out foreign funding
70 years on: remembering the Berlin candy bomber
German steel giant ThyssenKrupp scraps Tata merger
Train graffiti: How Germany is tackling its €38 million problem
Berlin park's 'drug dealing zones' spark outrage
More than two thirds of readers reject German Autobahn speed limit proposal

