Registration deadline approaches for City Council special election
[Image: Registration deadline approaches for City Council special election]
The city clerk says Ozawa and Waters will be the only candidates on the ballot, and the special election will be conducted by mail.

By Ashley Nagaoka  |  March 12, 2019 at 12:08 PM HST - Updated March 12 at 12:08 PM
HONOLULU (HawaiiNewsNow) - The deadline to register for April’s electoral rematch between Trevor Ozawa and Tommy Waters to represent Honolulu City Council District IV is quickly approaching.

The office of Honolulu’s City Clerk says interested voters have until 4:30 p.m. Thursday afternoon to register. Registered voters will then receive their ballot by mail around March 25, a spokesperson said.

Those who prefer to vote in person can do so at Honolulu Hale from April 1-13, excluding Sunday.

Honolulu’s City Council District IV generally encompasses the area between Hawaii Kai and Waikiki, including the Aina Haina, Kahala and Diamond Head neighborhoods. There are roughly 66,000 registered voters in the area, the city says.

The special election is a result of the state Supreme Court unanimously invalidating the 22-vote victory by Ozawa, the incumbent, over Waters in the November general election. The court said that officials improperly counted 350 late absentee ballots.

Former Honolulu rail executive Mike Formby has been serving in the City Council as the district’s interim representative.

City officials says the “do-over” election will cost around $250,000.

Copyright 2019 Hawaii News Now. All rights reserved.

79
[Image: weather icon]
Currently in
Honolulu, HI
Sponsored By
  Author
[Image: Ashley Nagaoka]
Ashley Nagaoka Reporter Honolulu, HI
Life takes you to unexpected places. Love brings you home.

  RECENT CONTENT
[Image: EMS: 17-year-old hit by a vehicle in Pearl City in critical condition ]
EMS: 17-year-old hit by a vehicle in Pearl City in critical condition
Details are developing.
By   HNN Staff
[Image: A popular ice cream shop is targeted by crooks twice in two weeks]
A popular ice cream shop is targeted by crooks twice in two weeks
The owner is trying to keep a positive attitude.
By   Dillon Ancheta
[Image: Turfwar brewing in Waikiki as beachboys spar over contract obligations]
  Turfwar brewing in Waikiki as beachboys spar over contract obligations
By   Rick Daysog
Published 51m at 9:25 PM
[Image: A Maui woman’s crusade: Put faces to all the names on Vietnam Veterans Memorial]
  A Maui woman’s crusade: Put faces to all the names on Vietnam Veterans Memorial
By   Jim Mendoza
Published 1h at 8:59 PM
[Image: HECO work to impact overnight traffic on the H-1 in Kapolei later this week]
HECO work to impact overnight traffic on the H-1 in Kapolei later this week
By   HNN Staff
Published 3h at 6:57 PM
[Image: Live in Urban Honolulu? You’ll have to start making appointments for bulky trash pickup]
  Live in Urban Honolulu? You’ll have to start making appointments for bulky trash pickup
By   Mahealani Richardson
Published 4h at 6:07 PM
420 Waiakamilo Road, Suite 205
Honolulu, HI 96817
Main (808) 847-3246
News (808) 847-1112