Tories admit UK WILL take part in EU elections despite Theresa May's Brexit vow
Cabinet minister David Lidington confirmed there is not enough time to get a Brexit deal through Parliament to avoid taking part in the £150million elections
The Tories have finally admitted the UK will have to take part in EU elections despite Theresa May vowing to stop them going ahead.

Senior cabinet minister David Lidington confirmed there was now not enough time to get a Brexit deal through Parliament.

And he admitted that the UK may not now leave the European Union until August 1, after the start of MPs’ summer recess.

Downing Street said the Prime Minister “deeply regrets” the elections - which could cost an estimated £150m - going ahead.

The humiliating admission comes despite repeated assurances by Mrs May that she was determined to prevent voters going to the polls.

In March, she told MPs: “As Prime Minister I am not prepared to delay Brexit any further than the June 30.”

The increased pressure on her already fragile leadership came as the Tories backbench chief again told her to set a departure date.

Cross-party Brexit talks between the Tories and Jeremy Corbyn have resumed  (Image: PA)  Read More
Nigel Farage: Jewish groups criticise Brexit Party leader for claims on Infowars
Sir Graham Brady, chairman of the 1922 committee, was thought to have warned her that unless she did she could face another challenge.

Grassroots Tory activists will also hold an emergency summit in June to hold a no confidence vote in the PM.

Cross-party Brexit talks kicked off again today with Labour sources downplaying claims they were ready to strike a deal.

Both Mrs May and Jeremy Corbyn had said last week’s poor local election results showed the public wanted them to get on with Brexit.

The key issue of a customs union was still dividing the parties with Labour MPs insisting there would need to be a confirmatory public vote while Tory MPs warning the compromise could permanently fracture the party.

Foreign secretary Jeremy Hunt said: “I’m not a believer in a customs union as a sustainable long-term solution.”

Mr Lidington claimed the Government was “redoubling our efforts” to get its Brexit deal ratified by the start of July, so 73 MEPs elected on May 23 month will never have to take their seats.

But he admitted wrangling could continue until MPs go on their summer holidays, delaying Brexit Day until August 1 when MEPs would give up their seats after just three weeks.

Cabinet minister David Lidington admits the UK will take part in the EU elections  (Image: PA)  Read More
Brexit: Theresa May admits yet another new date we could leave the EU
 
“We very much hoped that we would be able to get our exit sorted and have the treaty concluded so that those elections did not have to take place. But legally they do have to take place... so those will now go ahead,” he said.

“But we will be redoubling our efforts and talks with MPs of all parties to try to make sure that the delay after that is as short as possible.

“Ideally we’d like to be in a situation where those MEPs never actually have to take their seat at European Parliament - certainly, to get this done and dusted by the summer recess.”

The PM’s spokesman admitted the public would feel “great frustration” that the elections were taking place.

Tory MEP David Campbell Bannerman predicted the Tories would “get a kicking” and be down to 10 MEPs.

The new Brexit Party could scoop up the Leave vote while Remain supporters could flock to pro-EU parties like the Lib Dems.

It came as a handful of Brexiteer Tories hinted they could back a second referendum to resolve the issue once and for all.